This is a test.
Today's date is February 1st, 1984.
This is an interview with Norman Borlaug, B-O-R-L-A-U-G, Nobel Prize winner, 1970, father of the Green Revolution, and visiting professor at Texas A&M University.
This is Terry Anderson.
This is a test.
This is an interview with Norman Borlaug.
Today is February 6, 1984.
This is Terry Anderson.
We'd like to first start by talking about your parents.
Could you tell us about your background?
And if you'd like to go back before your parents and your grandparents, if you remember them, we'd like to start right there.
Well, I guess I'd better go back at least one generation, maybe two.
Although things get pretty foggy when you get back past the second one.
Apparently my grandfather on the Borlaug side was born in Wisconsin and when he was I think only a few months of age the family moved in a covered wagon to
Vermilion, South Dakota.
They had lived in Wisconsin, I think, six or seven years.
Settled there and apparently this farm was getting too small and they decided they were going to move farther to the frontier.
Just how long they were in Vermilion isn't clear.
But when the Indian uprisings occurred out there, they moved back to Northeast Isle.
And I was born under the grand parental... So they moved back then sometime in what, the 1880s?
No, back in the 1860s sometime.
I'm not sure the exact year.
In any case,
I do remember that little one-room country school that I attended, which my father attended.
My grandfather also went to that same one-room country school.
That was built in 1862, New Oregon Township No.
8.
Those, of course, are among my early recollection.
Since then,
or in recent years, when I've been back in Europe, I stopped and tried to trace back my roots.
And I found that, first I found that there were two branches of the family that lived, they both lived on Sognafjord.
And I found out about the first contact in a very curious way.
Back in about 60, maybe 60,
60, let's see if I can fix the time.
Somewhere around 1966 or thereabouts when I was on a Pan American plane flying from New York to New Delhi to assist in the wheat work there.
This flight went through Beirut and
I was asleep when the crew changed.
And when the flight left, I looked up.
Somebody touched me on the shoulder and said, are you Dr. Borlaug?
And I said, yes, ma'am.
And it was the stewardess, the purser, with the seating chart.
And she said, where are you coming from?
And I said, Mexico.
She looked at me and she said, but you're not Mexican.
I thought this was getting a little personal.
And she asked one or two other questions that were also very leading.
And finally, I stood up and I said, you must be a Borlaug.
She said, I am.
And this is the first time.
She said, I'm from Norway, from up at the head of Sodomfjord.
And you're the first person in the Americas that I've ever run into, and I've
been flying for Pan American for eight years and I've looked in all the telephone books in the different parts of the country wherever Pan American was based and I've never seen the name and yet we know that Borlaug's back in the middle of the last century moved to the Americas and so I exchanged cards with her
Then when I went to Norway, I guess the first time was en route back from the Soviet Union, maybe in 69.
And so I decided to see if I could find where my heritage and my parents came from.
And I went down to the fjord.
And the first place I stopped was up at the head of the fjord.
It's right at the end.
And this was the branch of the family that this stewardess came from.
It was not the one that we came from.
We came from about, I suppose, 40 kilometers, 20, 30 miles, farther down the fjord, a little place called Feos, F-A-E-O-S, I suppose, on the south side of the fjord.
I was taken to the place where the great grand parental family lived.
And all that was there, of course, was some old granite boulders that were part of the foundation of the house.
I got the impression that the plot of land that the family probably controlled was no bigger than this building, at least certainly not twice the size of this building.
And since they left in about 1850,
which coincided with about the time of the late Black famine in Western Europe, and especially in Ireland and the UK.
Well, I decided that they probably got sick of just eating fish after the potatoes failed.
And so they all migrated.
Later, I made contact with some of the family on my mother's side.
They also were Norwegian.
They came from the south, however.
Her name was Vala, and they came one generation later.
I gathered that there was this problem.
It was probably different in different parts of Norway as to how much you depended on potatoes.
In those rocky, narrow fjords, it was all potatoes and fish, apparently, pretty largely, because the land didn't lend itself for growing rye or wheat.
There was too little land.
Well, anyway,
Going back now, and so, great-grandfather Ole Borlaug migrated.
They landed in Wisconsin.
They settled there.
My grandfather was the third oldest.
He was one of five.
He would have been the third oldest.
He was born in Wisconsin.
Apparently, the family moved west
when the farm that they first settled on, which was near Racine.
Why did they pick Wisconsin?
No, I think they just simply came down the lake, St.
Lawrence down the lake.
So far as I know, they didn't know anyone.
There may have been others on the same boat, of course, from the same area.
And apparently when they
when they were frightened out of Dakota, South Dakota, they moved back to Northeast Iowa and there I think the linkages were because they were families from Wisconsin who had settled directly in Northeast Iowa and they knew about this so they went back to Northeast Iowa in this little community which was called Sauda, only in English we used to call it Saudi, S-A-U-D-E.
This was the same
name as the village that they came from, that my mother's family came from.
So they just did what so many other immigrants did by just transporting the name, the whole cultural baggage.
Yes, but the curious thing was in 69 or 70 when I went back there and I tried to find Salda, and I had known through my collaborative work in Pakistan, Professor Advar Arsling,
who was Professor of Agricultural Economics at the University of Oslo, or of OS, the Agricultural College.
And he was on home leave at that time, and before he left, before I went to Soviet Union, I said, I'm coming back through there, and I'd like to look around and see if I can find where some of my people came from.
By the time I got back, he said, there's no place named like this before he left.
But he said, when I get back, well, I'll check into it.
One of my old professors, very old, but he's mentally very sharp.
And he must know if anybody would know.
By the time I came back from the Soviet Union, I stopped to see him.
Then the whole thing had unraveled that this place that was originally Saldet, S-A-U-D-E, had been
changed to Sauherad in 1928.
It was the original name that they transplanted to the U.S.
was a Danish name.
And apparently in one of the waves of nationalism, they changed it back to Sauherad, which is the place.
So we went to, Professor Osvik took me to this little Lutheran church.
This was the right place out in the
was all the tombstones of the same families around Saudi, on my mother's side, the Landsbergs and Sennenson's.
That wasn't that fascinating.
Yes, it was.
And the Lutheran pastor, he said, well, you sit over there in that second pew.
That's where the valas always sat, and we'll sing the doxology or whatever it was.
So that was quite interesting.
This old church was
one of the early ones after conversion to Christianity, stone.
He said, let me show you something.
So we went back in the back, and when they had been refinishing scratching off the paint, there they found some of the old pagan Norse
They were still there.
He said, we didn't destroy them.
It's not blatant.
You don't see it out in front, but here back behind, there it is.
He said, I thought you'd be interested.
So this dates back to the early conversion to Christianity.
I've forgotten the date that they put on this church, but it was one of the very early ones in that part of Norway.
Then we found also
threads to my mother's family.
Again there, all of the boys, the sons, had migrated to the U.S., to Wisconsin, and then to Northeast Isle.
But the daughters had married and stayed in Norway, and so we made some contacts there.
And they probably came more about the 1870s now?
They came, yes.
Yes, I think that's right.
They came about 20 years after
Did they go straight out then to northeastern Iowa?
No, they'd settled in Wisconsin, too, and then moved to Iowa.
But I think Wisconsin was getting a little crowded from the standpoint of the pieces of land that were available.
Sure.
By that time, probably also, there was a little better machinery, and so you needed, even though it was bullock pulled, maybe horse and some, but I would imagine most of it was still oxen, you needed a little better, bigger piece of land.
So they moved to northeast Iowa and apparently where they had settled in Wisconsin, the Borlaugs had been there and moved to the Dakotas.
But many of those Wisconsin families had moved to northeast Iowa and so the Borlaugs came back to northeast Iowa.
And there my grandfather settled and his family
Let's see, there were three boys.
My father was the second oldest, Henry Borlaug.
Three boys and one daughter.
They lived on this small farm.
Well, I guess for its time, it was probably not too bad.
It was 120 acres or some such thing.
And the soil was very good.
They were probably rather, were they for prosperous, did you think?
No, they were.
Well, they lived a comfortable life, but they never wanted for anything.
And I have a little old account book of my grandfather's.
I wish I had brought it from Mexico.
It shows how things were in those times, going back apparently right after he was married.
I think
was before my aunt, the youngest member of the family was born, but the three sons and granddad and grandmother, they never did have an income until about the third year in this entry in the early 80s of more than $50 cash.
Then there's one that went about three times that much and that was when they sold the first crop of flax, apparently
That brought them quite a bit of money.
But the curious thing is to see how he accounted for everything down to a nickel, even two cents in his own handwriting.
The value of a dollar back up.
One interesting item there we used to, I never found this until after grandfather died much later.
But I used to kid dad.
about this.
Granddad was a bit of a rebel if you glance through that.
In what way?
He always used to be blunt about too much hypocrisy going on around here.
If he wanted to, for example, we lived on the edge of a Norwegian
community, but there were some wood lots, 10-acre wood lots, that were owned by Bohemians, Czechoslovaks, but they called themselves Bohemians, that lived in the next village.
So they'd come there and cut wood, and they'd come and go hunting squirrels and rabbits in the winter when it was cold.
And so I remember Hideo always used to invite them in, and when they were cold, he'd have a little alcohol and get the tea kettle,
pour a little of this and put sugar into it.
Since we were raised pretty straight Lutherans, some of the members of the family didn't like this very much, but my granddad was like that.
He said, wow.
He was pretty strong-willed in this respect.
And so I used to kid dad about, I said, look, look, and he spent a dollar of that budget on alcohol.
I said, that was a pretty heavy part of the budget.
Dad and Uncle Oscar both would say, yeah, but that was the medicine of the time, too.
And up to a point it was.
When you'd get a cold, they would put a little of that in hot water and some, we didn't have lemon juice and some sugar, and that was it.
So I guess that was okay, but Granddad was like that.
He always used to say, I believe in
not beating around the bush and saying how things really are.
Well, I was born and lived under the grandparental roof until, let's see, I was born on 25th of March, 1914, and we moved to the adjacent little farm where we built our own buildings in 1922, I suppose first of October or thereabouts.
So I was eight years old when we moved from the Grandville home.
By that time, I had a lot of fond memories of both grandfather and grandmother because I was the oldest of all the grandchildren.
And having been born under that roof, I guess the ties were closer than for most of the others.
How would you describe your grandparents?
What type of people were they?
They were very different.
Grandmother and grandfather.
They were both very wonderful, friendly people.
But my grandfather sometimes all, for example, he was a sort of rebellious when it came to the church.
He'd say, too many of them are hypocrites.
They live one way.
and go to church and look holy.
And that didn't sit well with him until he was much later in life, and then he mellowed.
But my earliest recollections, he'd get in some pretty strong arguments about this, living through lives.
Grandmother, of course, was very different.
But what I admire about both of them, Norwegian certainly was their first language.
They must have learned it as young children.
But they read voraciously in both English and Norwegian.
They still, at the time, my earliest recollections, and for many years after, they used to get the Scandinavian from Chicago.
And the Koraposten, a little northeast Iowa, weekly, I guess it was.
as well as the major, I guess they used to get, I don't remember, Kansas City Star or some such thing, and the weekly agricultural journals, Wallace, Farmer, and Homestead, these sort of things.
In that respect, they were very progressive.
They had one of the early little radios.
Granddad especially used to like to keep up on the news, listen to what was going on,
agriculture, and my father and mother, excuse me.
Okay, where were we?
Dad and mother?
Yeah, no, we were talking about your grandfather.
Grandparents.
And my grandmother, she was a very well-read person also.
One thing that I remember vividly about my grandfather, and I
often reflect on this.
He told me during the worst of the depression when farms were going broke, banks went broke and people were left penniless and their farms were foreclosed on to repay the double indemnity clauses on their bank stock and then a couple of years later, a year later, their personal property was sold at sheriff's sale
My granddad told me one day, he said, look, Norman, you get an education.
These upheavals, social upheavals will come and go, but if you have a good education, you can always rebuild from the ground up.
And if you don't have it, and then you lose everything, then it's a real problem.
And I suppose
Among other things, this was one of the things that motivated me to try to get a higher education.
Years later.
Yeah, that your grandfather had a definite impact on your character in your development.
Oh, yes.
Definitely.
And in that respect- Other things besides education, that you think he had a strong impact?
I think he had in one other way.
Okay.
All the rest of the members of the family were inclined to be, never speak too bluntly or straightforward on any issue.
I mean, they didn't believe in being too blunt.
But when it was an issue that my grandfather felt strongly about, he didn't pull any punches.
And I guess I inherited a bit of that also.
If I feel strongly about something, I'm going to say it like it is.
For example, in many of these environmental issues of the day, like all of this ethylene-dibromide right now, and many of these others, I get pretty disgusted with the overkill that goes on where you substitute emotions for scientific data and their interpretation.
Don't pull any punches when I have a chance in the right podium from which to say this.
And I'm sure that part of that came from what I learned from my grandfather's philosophy on not being afraid to speak out, even though sometimes it's unpleasant from a personal standpoint.
I was wondering if he was ever in any of the farm organizations.
No, he was never a member of any.
No, there was none of those organizations were in existence around the community at that time.
Not around that little rural community.
Do you know if he ever supported the populist party or any other?
He used to read these sorts of things.
pretty liberal on all of these sorts of things, but he was never a member of any of them.
Excuse me.
This is your interview.
No, no.
Well, I was going to say, what political party did he usually support when you were young, when you were very young and you were still on the farm?
I think he was a true independent.
He'd vote for whoever caught his fancy.
But I think quite often on the
liberal side center.
How about your grandmother?
La Follette and these sorts of people.
Progressives, progressives.
Yes.
My grandmother on the Borlaug side, Swenemson was her family name, she didn't take much interest in politics, but she used to read very broadly, both of them.
On my mother's side, the two grandparents, Vala, Ole Vala, who came really one generation later, he was not married when he migrated from Norway, and he married in Wisconsin, but he became a very successful farmer.
He expanded when he should have.
He had a large family.
quite different than the Borlaugs, which were four for that time, which was not a big family.
But he had eight daughters, of which my mother was one and three sons.
And he got to be a big and wealthy farmer for his time.
And bought a lot of land, and I think a lot of that land, I don't remember the details,
or turned over to certain members of the family and he retired fairly early, probably in his late 50s or early 60s, but he never, he didn't live very long.
He died, I suppose, when I was 10 or 11 from pneumonia.
Did you have much contact with them?
Much less because they lived in
the town of New Hampton, which was about 18 miles away.
And 18 miles, what kind of roads we had at that time, didn't see them too often.
How many acres did they have in his farm, do you remember?
Well, I don't remember because it was split up in different farms.
But it would have been for its time.
if you put them all together, a large farm.
Was there some jealousy between the grandparents?
They never had much to do with each other.
To my knowledge, no personal animosities, but they just, one lived in New Hampton, and the Borlaks, their town where they traded,
The railroad town was Cresco.
And Cresco and New Hampton were about 30 miles apart.
The little community where we lived was just about halfway between, but a little closer to Cresco.
And that little community was a wide four corners.
All it had was a general country store.
a feed mill, blacksmith shop, a farmer's cooperative creamery, and two Lutheran churches.
It occurred after the split, apparently, one of the churches was built.
The original community was with a straight lace that I came from, Norwegian or the Missouri Synod.
You're familiar with the structure of the Lutheran church.
And the Norwegian Synod of the Missouri Synod was one of the most ultra-conservative
And that was apparently the first congregation.
And then when the... I can remember, not very vividly, when the split came and when the other church came into being.
And that had some unpleasantries.
But that was not involved between my two grandparents' families because they both stayed in the original.
Oh, they did?
Oh, why?
Why the difference between the two?
Why did they both stay in the same?
I think probably mainly because the change itself is kind of in anything we do.
I'm a firm believer that status quo, for the most part, unless there are some really big issues involved, is comfortable.
The fear of the unknown is
frightening.
This is, I think, a basic principle in all social reform, in everything that I've done in my scientific life in developing nations.
One of my biggest problems to get technology transferred and into operation after it's been adequately tested, that it's as foolproof as you can make it, is to get people to change.
And even though they blame the farmer
for being ultra conservative, it's been my experience that the most conservative of the lot are the senior scientists and the top bureaucrats because they've struggled for a long time in their careers to reach the pinnacle and then you don't want somebody rocking the canoe.
Status quo is comfortable, I repeat.
Fear the unknown is frightening to too many people.
And of course status quo is
when you talk about food, is a false concept in the first place, because we're 84 million more people every year, and if you stand still, you lose ground.
Well, I got off the track.
Yeah, we're going to get to that, believe me.
We're going to spend a lot of time on that.
In the case of father and mother, father was also
He simply went through the eight grades in the same one-room country school that I went to.
And how far did your grandparents go through school?
So far as I know through this, I think at that time it only went through sixth grade.
Yeah, okay.
Whatever they offered at that time.
I suspect it was sixth grade.
By that time my father arrived, it was eighth grade, and then for two winters he went to the court some
Little, I suppose you would call it a business college.
I don't know the term you would use.
Just for a few, two or three months each winter.
For some kind of short course probably.
Right.
And that was the extent of his education.
My mother more or less the same.
My father was very well-read.
He used to read voraciously, all sorts of things, not just agricultural publications, but all of the magazines at the time, going back to the time of Reader's Digest and Saturday Evening Post and these sorts of things.
And he always listened to the news, the radio.
We had one of the early radios.
around the community.
Do you remember when you got it?
I suppose.
Early 1920s?
Yeah, soon after we moved to this new home, which was 22, it must have been 23 or 24, 24 probably, and I remember it was quite a, for the people in the community, in the cold winter nights you know that the neighbor boys
sometimes the elderly people too would come over and used to have these headsets and you'd take them off and take each one listen to the music or whatever it was it was kind of a rallying point so those things i remember vividly we used to of course walk to school except when the blizzards were too bad then sometimes they'd come from
We'd walk about a mile and a half, close to a mile and three quarters, I guess, each way.
And this was a one-room country school.
It used to have anywhere from 25 to 30 students.
One teacher handled everything from primary to the eighth grade.
Many of the people in the eighth grade were boys who came only during the winter months when there wasn't too much farm work.
And some of them would be 17, 18 years old.
How the school teacher ever kept order in that chaos is beyond me, but I always remember vividly the little willow switch up there on top of the blackboard.
And although I had quite a few teachers during the eight years that I was there, I remember one in particular used to use that
Willis, which whenever she thought that it would be beneficial, there was no nonsense.
Were most of the teachers female?
Mostly female.
As a matter of fact, all of mine were.
Were they usually originally from the community?
No.
They came from either the Cresco High School or the New Hampton High School where they had normal training programs at that time.
Let's get back to your parents now.
Okay.
Okay, we started in and you said that they went through the eighth grade and a little bit of business college after that.
Was that to help them on the farm basically?
I think so far as I could figure out, it had to do with keeping books or something to do with that sort of thing.
And how to write a business letter and these sorts of things.
Now, you said that when you were about eight years old, you moved from the farm.
From the grandparents' farm to the farm where I grew up, which was across the field diagonally.
That farm originally was 56 acres that my father had bought, probably borrowing part of it from grandfather.
But by the time he moved there in 22,
and built these buildings.
We only built the house and the chicken house, milk, cooling place, and a stable, not a barn, and I guess a corn curtain and the rest of it.
But we didn't have, apparently he didn't have enough money to build the barn.
That was not built until 29.
By that time he had paid off his debts, apparently, and he had enough money in the bank.
And just after
They bought all the lumber for the barn, which was built in 29.
The banks went broke.
But he was fortunate that he had this all purchased, and so the barn came into being.
Gradually, I think he bought about 45 acres more, something like that.
So the farm grew to the magnificent size of about 105 acres.
That's all it ever was.
But by then, I should say that
We always, in part, worked with the grand parental farm.
Grandfather was so old then.
Some sort of a partnership in a sense.
Exchange work, loose.
Nothing.
Not a financial partnership.
No.
And shortly after we moved to the little farm where I grew up, my father's brother, Oscar, who was a bachelor, never did marry.
who had been a fireman on one of the railroads.
I think probably, I don't remember if it was Milwaukee or one of the railroads that went through the Midwest.
And he had been lucky and he, on the drawings for the Rosebud Reservation out at Winter, South Dakota, he was one of the numbers that was drawn.
And so he moved out there, he left the railroad and lived there and farmed that area, I don't know how many years.
But after Dad moved to this farm, a couple of years later, he came back to the grand parental farm.
So he used to exchange work and run both of those farms.
Oscar and Henry.
How did your father get along with your grandfather?
Very well.
They never had any clash.
They were very different.
Why did they get along so well?
Children always don't get along so well with their parents.
I guess if I were to try to analyze that, recognizing my
inability to have known what happened when Dad was younger.
I think Dad used to be pretty flexible.
He used to arrive at a point where, well, hell, it's not worth arguing about.
But he was not gutless.
If there was a principal involved, well, he'd speak up, but not nearly so bluntly as grandfather.
Dad was a very kind person.
a very good father, and so was my mother, but my mother was an entirely different person, very quiet and reserved.
Well, let's talk about that.
What do you mean?
Let's talk about the characters, but let's first start on.
What do you mean by saying your father was a good father?
He always provided for our needs within the limits of what he had, but he always insisted that we take care of things.
not throwing our clothes around and ruining them or whatever we happened to have.
That there'd be some orderliness.
But he never was preaching this.
He just taught you some way in an easy sort of way that there were responsibilities.
And you had certain jobs to do.
And I never remember having had an unpleasant discussion with him.
Really?
The whole time you grew up?
Not that I can remember.
Isn't that kind of phenomenal?
I don't know, but I don't remember any such things.
He never crossed words with you?
No, he may have said, look, we've got to get out there and cultivate this corn or something like that.
No goofing off, but never, to my knowledge, anything that was of enough substance so that it left an indelible
mark on and mother on the other hand but dad was the one that decided this is the way we're going to spend our money and this is what we the order of priorities and mother so what was the authority in the household yeah and mother
From an economic standpoint and planning how the monies and how the budget was going to be, budget such as it was.
It wasn't down in black and white necessarily.
But that was the person who got the shots.
So it was a pretty traditional family situation.
Right.
Mother was, as I say, one of eight sisters.
Yeah.
And she was one of the younger ones.
And she was...
Very kind, soft-spoken.
Also, well, I guess both dad and mother were very religious people, really.
They were pretty active in the church, in the women's, what do you call it, ladies' aid or whatever it was.
And dad used to sing in the choir.
He had a good base, and he used to enjoy that.
I always used to remember the Christmas programs, the Christmas Eve programs.
And he enjoyed singing, not just religious songs, but other things.
If there was community gathering, quite often they'd get together and sing.
But did he usually use religion as a disciplinary tool?
How did he use religion?
You say he's a religious man.
And then you said that he liked to sing in the church.
Was it basically social?
No, I think he lived a religious life from that standpoint, from the moral ethics of Lutheranism.
Okay.
I do remember that, I remember when that split in the church was going on, the unpleasantries.
I was too young to capture all of it.
But I used to say to Dan, what's this all about?
Why this big furrow?
And he would try to reduce it to its simplicity with me that, well,
One says that you can't get to heaven in essence, boiling it down to simplicity, by good works alone.
The other one says, well, you better do both, or words to this effect.
In other words, the Missouri Synod was with the basic sin of all, that it had to be on belief that salvation was built on.
that you were a born sinner and that overwhelmed everything.
But it didn't say, on the other hand, that you shouldn't live a good Christian life.
At least this is the way I interpreted it.
And I remember he was trying to explain this to me when this furor was going on in the community.
One thing that I think is interesting about how life was back in that time, from my grandfather's account book, you could see
that they went to the railroad town when my father was young, before I was born, only twice a year.
Once in the fall, apparently before snow came, when they would buy the certain things to carry them through the winter, you could tell by the dates, and then in late winter buy sled before it got muddy, and those
were the times in the fall when they would sell cattle or pigs or whatever.
You could tell from the entrance on their income.
But they sold there.
So they got paid basically twice a year?
Mostly once a year.
The second trip in winter was mostly purchased by for the oncoming summer.
Among my other recollections is what Christmas was like at that time.
You know, I mentioned that we had these Christmas programs and Christmas Eve.
And, of course, the roads were impassable generally because of the snow.
You couldn't drive the cars.
They were Model Ts at that time.
Generally, you'd have to hitch up the sled and the horses and drive to the little church that we belonged to at the village of Saudi.
about five and a half miles.
They had a Christmas tree and the children would put on the Christmas program, the story of Christmas.
Then at the end of this, the children, in addition to depressions that were passed around, got a stocking full of candy.
an orange.